## Background
{:#background}

Open Standards for Linking Organizations (OSLO) [](cite:cites buyle_egose_2016), a program of the Flanders Information Agency enables organizations in Flanders to cooperate in trajectories, to develop unambiguous standards for information exchange. The “OSLO mobility: trips and offer” standard [](cite:cites tripsandoffer) was triggered by the new decree Basic Accessibility in Flanders [](cite:cites ba), which states that important social locations must be optimally accessible to travellers. To realize this one must have a clear view on the existing mobility offer and on how to interconnect the various transport options in a multimodal mobility context. The standard consists of vocabularies for describing trips, transport networks and service offerings and of a “trips and offer” application profile (AP). The AP allows the exchange of data concerning (a) trips done by users and (b) the mobility services at their disposal. A trip can be executed over multiple routes (shortest, fastest etc.). A route consists of one or more route segments with every segment representing a part of the route using the same means of transport and taken without a transfer. The geospatial representation of these segments is described with directed links based on the INSPIRE data specification [](cite:cites inspire) for the spatial data theme Transport Networks.

The Local Council Decisions as Linked Open Data (LBLOD)[](cite: citesbuyle_iswc_demo_2016) programme is a Flemish initiative to semantically annotate decisions of local governments. Local administrations currently have to upload certain decisions from their organization into Flemish base registries, such as the database for mandates or road sign database. By embedding RDFa in their documents, the Flemish government and third parties can harvest the information  themselves in an automatic way, similarly to search engines that harvest Schema.org annotations from websites. LBLOD has already initiated several OSLO trajectories for domain-specific decisions, such as the installment or removal of mandataries [](cite:cites mandate), traffic [](cite:cites trafficmeasurement) and subsidy regulations [](cite:cites subsidymeasurement). The “subsidies” AP reuses from the European ISA standard Core Criterion and Core Evidence Vocabulary (CCCEV) [](cite:cites cccev) the mechanism to describe criteria, requirements and how to group them. Local governments can define with this AP their subsidy measurements, such as mobility related compensations, its criteria and monetary compensation in a machine-readable way.

