## Discussion
{:#discussion}

Based on the benchmarking results from previous section, we start our discussion by verifying our hypotheses. Thereafter, we will answer our research questions more in depth.

Our first hypothesis H1 states that a SSE interface will result in a lower latency on the client than with polling. When comparing the latency the client on [](#latency-polling-pubsub), we see that SSE always has a lower maximal latency on the client than a polling interface with server-side cache enabled, so we accept H1. Surprisingly, to achieve this distribution for SSE from 0s onwards, we had to add a sleep function of 1ms between every 1000 clients. Otherwise, all responses are first stored in the kernel buffer before getting transmitted which causes a higher minimum latency on the client. This behavior is not described in implementation guidelines of SSE or Websockets so we hope that this article can help informing the Node.js community. 

For our second hypothesis H2, we expected a faster growing server cost of SSE than polling. Previously [](cite:cites rojas2018preliminary), it was argued that the capabilities of HTTP caching would outperform the server cost of SSE for a high number of clients, although polling has an initial higher server cost. CPU usage results ([](#server-cost)) show that nginx indeed improves the CPU usage for polling, but it is still steeper than SSE, so we reject H2. Publishers should take note of the higher memory footprint of SSE, because all client connections are saved in memory. When data needs to be encrypted using TLS, then we expect that the server-side CPU cost for both polling and pushing will be only be slighty higher, because TCP connections are kept alive for both approaches and thus the time and resource expensive TLS handshake only needs to be done once for the first HTTP request. [](cite:cites nginx-ssl).

Hypothesis H3 can also be falsified, because the CPU usage of polling grows apart higher than SSE for a large number of clients. In other words, answering requests with a cached copy still has a higher CPU cost than pushing updates directly. In terms of scalability, we saw in [](#latency-polling-pubsub) that SSE is able to serve 25k clients, while polling could only serve 8k clients. From our hypotheses, we see that SSE is favoured based on scalability, server cost and latency on the client. 

The field report ([](#fieldreport)) shows for the vehicle positions dataset that updates are generated every 20s and polling is used. When an end user wants to reuse this information inside the OpenTripPlanner application, then a polling frequency (s) needs to be specified. This depends on the maximal latency on the client that an end user perceives as acceptable. Even if the update interval of the live dataset is known, e.g. every 5s like in our benchmark, matching the polling frequency with this update interval would still create a latency on the client distribution between 0s and the polling frequency. In the worst case, an HTTP response is returned just before a new update arrives, so the client will only fetch this update with the next request round. Given the results of our hypotheses, we question at which point the maximum acceptable latency on the client (MAL) of an end user must be in order that our polling interface can serve more clients than SSE. In the next paragraph, we will describe how we can theoretically calculate this MAL cut-off point between polling and SSE.

In our benchmark, we tested with the Wrk HTTP benchmarking tool that our polling interface could serve up to 2.52k requests/s. When all users would have started polling at different starting times every 5s, so they configured a MAL of 5s, then our polling interface could have served theoretically up to 12.6k clients (2.52*5) instead of 8k from our benchmark. This can be generalized with the following formula, which states that the maximum supported number of requests/s of a polling interface (2.52k in our case) must be higher than the expected number of users that make one request every MAL seconds:

$$Requests_{max supported}/s  ≥  Users * request/MAL\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ (1)$$

Open Data publishers can calculate with formula (1) how many users with a certain MAL can be	 maximally served. In practice, users can configure a higher polling frequency than the expected MAL, so the number of users that can be served will probably be lower. To compare this with SSE, we see on [Fig. 3.2](#latency-polling-pubsub) that SSE can maximally serve 25k clients over a MAL of 4s, which is still more than polling can serve (10k clients) with this MAL. By increasing the MAL, we found that a MAL of 10s allows our polling interface to serve the same number of clients (25k) as SSE. This should not be interpreted as a universal number, because there are other factors that can influence this number: an AMD CPU architecture could be more performant than the ARM architecture we used or publishing in a global network could add extra network latency for polling [](cite:cites 6197172). Nonetheless, this number gives an indication that users must have a relatively high MAL (> 10s) in order that polling can serve a higher number of clients than pushing with the same amount of resources. This brings us to our research question where our single-threaded comparison shows that pushing is the best choice up to a maximum latency on the client of 10s. For datasets where all users configure a MAL above 10s, then a polling interface is capable to serve a higher number of clients, which can be calculated with formula (1).

[](#server-cost) showed that HTTP caching is crucial for a polling interface to lower the CPU usage, but for variantly updating datasets it is not possible to foresee when the next update will happen. For this use case, we advise to only cache the response for 1s in the reverse proxy (micro caching), and thus still off-load the back-end Web API. At last, caching headers should always be set if possible, according to the arrival of the next update so the user can still configure its preferred MAL and bandwidth usage can be reduced.
