## Introduction
{:#introduction}

The Open Data deployment scheme [](cite:cites 5stars) defines 5 steps that data publishers can undertake to raise the technical and semantical interoperability of their Open datasets on the Web. With the use of the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) as a communication protocol, a dataset becomes technically interoperable with the Web of data [](cite:cites colpaert_computer_2014, rezaei2014review). This allows Open Data consumers to retrieve a resource (e.g. a document that is part of the dataset) by sending an HTTP GET method to the Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) of the resource. 
<span class="placeholder printonly">
<span style="display: block; height: 7em;"></span>
<!-- This is a dummy placeholder for the LNCS first page footnote -->
</span>
For live changing resources, such as the measurements of a sensor, there are two communication mechanisms to share an update in a timely fashion to clients. First, there is pull where the client initiates the action to retrieve a resource. This category has two representatives: HTTP polling and HTTP long polling. Next, you have push where the server pushes updates of a resource to the client. Server-Sent Events (SSE) and Websockets are implementations for this mechanism. 
Lubbers et al. [](cite:cites lubbers2016html5) compared Websockets with HTTP polling for a dataset that updates every second and up to 100k clients, but this was only a theoretical analysis of the bandwidth usage and latency. Depending on the size of the header information, a bandwidth reduction of 500:1 can be made with Websockets and a latency reduction of 3:1. Pimentel et al. [](cite:cites 6197172) went a step further and investigated how the physical distance between publisher and consumer impacts the overall latency. They performed a comparison between polling, long polling and Websockets where a new sensor update of roughly 100 bytes is published per second. They defined formulas to check when polling or long polling is feasible for updates on time, dependent on the network latency. When the network latency exceeds half the update rate of the dataset, then Websockets is the better choice. However, there is no evaluation performed on the performance of the server under a high load of clients, which is an important factor that needs to be considered for Open Data publishing. 

One of the key features of publishing data on the Web is HTTP caching, which has not been addressed in related work [](cite:cites lubbers2016html5, 6197172, slodziak2016performance). This allows a resource to become stateless and can be shared with proxy caches or Content Network Delivery (CDN) services to offload the server. With push-based interfaces like Websockets, caching of a resource is not possible as the server needs to actively push the content in a stateful manner to all subscribed clients. In previous work [](cite:cites rojas2018preliminary), a minimum set of technical requirements and a benchmark between pull (HTTP polling) and push (Websockets) have been introduced for publishing live changing resources on the Web. This benchmark tested with only 200 clients, which did not yield conclusive results on the latency or scalability issues that arise inside an Open Data ecosystem, where client numbers of 15 000 are not an exception [](cite:cites colpaert_icwe_2017). In this article, we will run a similar benchmark between HTTP polling and SSE with up to 25k clients. SSE is tested instead of Websockets, because it has a similar performance [](cite:cites slodziak2016performance), communication is unidirectional which is suitable for Open Data and lastly, it only relies on HTTP instead of a Websockets protocol, which lowers the complexity of reusing a dataset.

The remainder of this article is structured as follows: we will provide in the related work section an overview of publication techniques and the current state of publishing RDF Streams on the Web. RDF Streams are applicable for describing live updating resources with the Resource Description Framework (RDF) and thus resolve the fourth step of the Open Data deployment scheme [](cite:cites 5stars). Thereafter, we conduct a field report to quantify how many live Open datasets are available on the Open Data portals of Europe and the U.S. to observe which update retrieval mechanism is used in different domains. In the problem statement section, we define our research questions and hypotheses, which we will then evaluate with a benchmark between HTTP polling and SSE. In the discussion and conclusion, based on the results of the benchmark, we will propose some guidelines for data publishers when to use pull or push interfaces.
